day-2

8/8/26   day-2

Data Model:
data model is way of organizion the data and representing the data,
how to store data, how to manipulate the data into DBMS

Types of data model:
1.Hierarachial data model:
the organized data into a tree like structure(parent and child)
every child contain only one parent.
every parent can have multiple childs.
In that model easy retrive and maintain the data.
In that above model not comfortable for maintain complex relationships.
EX : institute -----cource-------students

Network data model:
The data is organized into nodes(entities) and edges(relationships)
In that mode one parent contain many childs.
One child can have many parent.
It flexible for compare to hierarical model.
EX : one student can take multiple cource
each cource learn multiple students.

Object oriented data model :
All data represented at objects.
Every object can have 2 things(properties)
Properties and behaviors.

Relational data model:
The data is stored into a table with column(fields) and rows(records/tuple/entry).
Ex : student : stdid, sname..etc

Data Model Levels:
1.conceptual level (what we need)
2.Logical level(to design)
3.Physical level(implementation)
 
Introduction of SQL:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
sql stands for structured query language.
It is used to communicate with database such as MySQL, oracle, postgrace
Using sql language :
To create and delete structure in database
To insert , update, and delete data.
Easy to retrive the data into a database.
To provide the control access.

SQL language is divided into different categories(sub):
1.DDL
DDL stands for data definition language. it used to create manupaliate database . such as tables, views, database, and sceme
i)create
ii)alter
iii)drop (it remove total structure)
iv)truncate  (it is used only remove data not structure)
v)rename
It only perform on struture 

2.DML
DML stands for data manipulation language. it is used to add, update and delete the data
i)insert (new data insert)  
ii)update  (to modify the insert data) 
iii)delete  (to delete )
It perform on data

3.TCL
TCL stands for tranction control language. it is used to tranctions
i)commit; 
ii)rollback;
iii)savepoint;(check points after rollback)

4.DQL
DQL stands for data query language. it is used to retrive the data
i)select(used to retrive the data)

5.DCL
DCL stands for data control language. it is used to provide control access for database
i)grant  (gives the permission to read write..etc)
ii)revoke 

Data types in SQL :
1.Numeric data types
tinyint : it store very tiny amount of data 0&1
smallint :
mediumint
int
bigint
float
decimal(p,s) : total number of digits before decimal point, total number of digits after decimal points
Boolean : true or 1/false or 0
 
2.String data types
char() : It contain fixed length
EX char(2);
varchar() : it contain variable length
EX varchar(20);
text 
Enum : it is select only one value in a pre defined list.
Enum ('java' ,'phyton', 'da');

3.date and Time types
date : 'yyyy-mm-dd'
time : 'hh-mm-Ss'
date and time : 'yyyy-mm-dd hh-mm-ss
timestamp : current time

